Initial content for Arrow Cookbook for Python and R (#1)
apache/arrow-cookbook: python/source/io.rst

========================
Reading and Writing Data
========================

Recipes related to reading and writing data from disk using
Apache Arrow.

.. contents::

Write a Parquet file
====================

.. testsetup::

    import numpy as np
    import pyarrow as pa

    arr = pa.array(np.arange(100))

Given an array with all numbers from 0 to 100

.. testcode::

    print(f"{arr[0]} .. {arr[-1]}")

.. testoutput::

    0 .. 99

To write it to a Parquet file, as Parquet is a columnar format,

> we must create a :class:`pyarrow.Table` out of it,

Reviewer: Parquet being columnar is not quite the reason, it's that Parquet is a file format for storing tables with named columns, so we have to put the array in a Table or RecordBatch, giving that array a name within the object's schema

Author: I see how using "columnar" in this context might be misleading, I used it to mean "contains multiple columns" but I see that one might understand it as "column oriented/major" which is not what I was referring to here. I'll rephrase this as `"as Parquet is a format that contains multiple named columns"` which should be clear and explicitly point out they are named as you suggested.

so that we get a table of a single column which can then be
written to a Parquet file. 

.. testcode::

    table = pa.Table.from_arrays([arr], names=["col1"])

Once we have a table, it can be written to a Parquet File 
using the functions provided by the ``pyarrow.parquet`` module

.. testcode::

    import pyarrow.parquet as pq

>     pq.write_table(table, "example.parquet", compression=None)

Reviewer 2: Why are you specifying `compression=None` here?

Reading a Parquet file
======================

Given a Parquet file, it can be read back to a :class:`pyarrow.Table`
by using :func:`pyarrow.parquet.read_table` function

.. testcode::

    import pyarrow.parquet as pq

    table = pq.read_table("example.parquet")

The resulting table will contain the same columns that existed in
the parquet file as :class:`ChunkedArray`

.. testcode::

    print(table)

    col1 = table["col1"]

>     print(f"{type(col1).__name__} = {col1[0]} .. {col1[-1]}")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    print(f"ChunkedArray = {col1[0]} .. {col1[-1]}")
```
Nit: I feel like the reference to `__name__` is adding more confusion than it explains.

.. testoutput::

    pyarrow.Table
    col1: int64

>     ChunkedArray = 0 .. 99

Reviewer: Per above, I worry a bit about the maintainability of having `__repr__` outputs etc. pasted into these cookbook recipes.

Author: I was actually one of the original design goals of the cookbook, while it's true that it might require more maintenance cost when the repr output changes, it's a minor effort (you just need to copy the new output into the old `.. testoutput`) but that will guarantee us that if there is _any_ change in arrow in terms of behaviours the recipes will always reflect exactly what arrow is going to do/answer.
We plan to setup a nightly job to verify the cookbook against the latest arrow master so that we catch any change and can update it.

Reading a subset of Parquet data
================================

When reading a Parquet file with :func:`pyarrow.parquet.read_table` 

> it is possible to restrict which Columns and Rows have to be read

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it is possible to restrict which Columns and Rows will be read
```

> in memory by using the ``filters`` and ``columns`` arguments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
into memory by using the ``filters`` and ``columns`` arguments
```

.. testcode::

    import pyarrow.parquet as pq

    table = pq.read_table("example.parquet", 
                          columns=["col1"],
                          filters=[
                              ("col1", ">", 5),
                              ("col1", "<", 10),
                          ])

The resulting table will contain only the projected columns
and filtered rows. Refer to :func:`pyarrow.parquet.read_table`

> documentation for details about filters syntax.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
documentation for details about the syntax for filters.
```

.. testcode::

    print(table)

    col1 = table["col1"]

>     print(f"{type(col1).__name__} = {col1[0]} .. {col1[-1]}")

Reviewer 2: Same as above
```suggestion
    print(f"ChunkedArray = {col1[0]} .. {col1[-1]}")
```

.. testoutput::

    pyarrow.Table
    col1: int64
    ChunkedArray = 6 .. 9
    

Saving Arrow Arrays to disk
===========================

> Apart using arrow to read and save common file formats like Parquet,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apart from using arrow to read and save common file formats like Parquet,
```
Or maybe just `In addition to using...`

it is possible to dump data in the raw arrow format which allows 

> direct memory mapping of data from disk. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
direct memory mapping of data from disk. This format is called
the Arrow IPC format.
```

Given an array with all numbers from 0 to 100

.. testcode::

    print(f"{arr[0]} .. {arr[-1]}")

.. testoutput::

    0 .. 99

We can save the array by making a :class:`pyarrow.RecordBatch` out
of it and writing the record batch to disk.

.. testcode::

    schema = pa.schema([
        pa.field('nums', arr.type)
    ])

    with pa.OSFile('arraydata.arrow', 'wb') as sink:
        with pa.ipc.new_file(sink, schema=schema) as writer:
            batch = pa.record_batch([arr], schema=schema)
            writer.write(batch)

> If we were to save multiple arrays into the same file,

Reviewer 2: This is a little imprecise.  Technically you could save multiple arrays into the same file by calling `write(batch)` multiple times.  Maybe "multiple columns"?

we would just have to adapt the ``schema`` accordingly and add
them all to the ``record_batch`` call.

Memory Mapping Arrow Arrays from disk
=====================================

> Arrow arrays that have been written to disk in the Arrow
> format itself can be memory mapped back directly from the disk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Arrow arrays that have been written to disk in the Arrow IPC
format can be memory mapped back directly from the disk.
```

.. testcode::

    with pa.memory_map('arraydata.arrow', 'r') as source:
        loaded_arrays = pa.ipc.open_file(source).read_all()

.. testcode::

    arr = loaded_arrays[0]
    print(f"{arr[0]} .. {arr[-1]}")

.. testoutput::

    0 .. 99

Writing CSV files
=================

It is currently possible to write an Arrow :class:`pyarrow.Table` to
CSV by going through pandas. Arrow doesn't currently provide an optimized

> code path for writing to CSV.

Reviewer 2: This is true for 4.0.0 but there is an Arrow CSV writer in 5.0.0.

.. testcode::

    table = pa.Table.from_arrays([arr], names=["col1"])
    table.to_pandas().to_csv("table.csv", index=False)

Reading CSV files
=================

Arrow can read :class:`pyarrow.Table` entities from CSV using an

> optimized codepath that can leverage multiple threads.

Reviewer 2: I think this is ok but Arrow is **always** using an optimized code path that can potentially leverage multiple threads for everything it does.

.. testcode::

    import pyarrow.csv

    table = pa.csv.read_csv("table.csv")

> Arrow will do its best to guess data types, further options can be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Arrow will do its best to infer data types.  Further options can be
```

provided to :func:`pyarrow.csv.read_csv` to drive
:class:`pyarrow.csv.ConvertOptions`.

.. testcode::

    print(table)

    col1 = table["col1"]
    print(f"{type(col1).__name__} = {col1[0]} .. {col1[-1]}")

.. testoutput::

    pyarrow.Table
    col1: int64
    ChunkedArray = 0 .. 99

> Reading Partitioned data

Reviewer 2: I don't believe this file is using the word `Partitioned` correctly.  Partitioned data is data that has been arranged into directories with special names.  A dataset (and all of these examples) does not need partitioned data.  You can have one directory with a bunch of files (which is what most of the examples are) and that is not "partitioned" data.  It is simply a dataset.

Conversely, when you read partitioned data you are able to extract that directory name information as a column.  None of the examples demonstrate this.

Author: While I see where your point of view is coming, I'm not sure there is an agreement over the fact that "Partitioned" means "divided by directories". Actually in arrow documentation itself we say that "Partitioned" means "Multiple Files" ( https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/parquet.html#partitioned-datasets-multiple-files ) and in general I think that people have an understanding of the work "partitioned" as "divided in multiple blocks", how you organize those blocks (files, directories, vertically, horitzontally, etc..) doesn't influence much the fact that they are divided in partitions.

It's a fair point btw that we don't show to to extract as a column the directory structure when things are partitioned by directory (using hive or other format), that's a good point and we should have a recipe for that one.

========================

In some cases, your dataset might be composed by multiple separate
files each containing a piece of the data. 

.. testsetup::

    import pathlib
    import pyarrow.parquet as pq

    examples = pathlib.Path("examples")
    examples.mkdir(exist_ok=True)

    pq.write_table(pa.table({"col1": range(10)}), 
                   examples / "dataset1.parquet", compression=None)
    pq.write_table(pa.table({"col1": range(10, 20)}), 
                   examples / "dataset2.parquet", compression=None)
    pq.write_table(pa.table({"col1": range(20, 30)}), 
                   examples / "dataset3.parquet", compression=None)

> In this case the :func:`pyarrow.dataset.dataset` function provides
> an interface to discover and read all those files as a single big dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case the :func:`pyarrow.dataset` module provides
methods to discover and read all those files as a single big dataset.
```

For example if we have a structure like:

.. code-block::

    examples/
    ├── dataset1.parquet
    ├── dataset2.parquet
    └── dataset3.parquet

> Then, pointing the ``dataset`` function to the ``examples`` directory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, pointing the :func:`pyarrow.dataset.dataset` function to the ``examples`` directory
```
Contingent on the previous suggestion of course

will discover those parquet files and will expose them all as a single

> dataset:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:class:`pyarrow.dataset.Dataset`:
```

.. testcode::

    import pyarrow.dataset as ds

    dataset = ds.dataset("./examples", format="parquet")
    print(dataset.files)

.. testoutput::

    ['./examples/dataset1.parquet', './examples/dataset2.parquet', './examples/dataset3.parquet']

The whole dataset can be viewed as a single big table using
:meth:`pyarrow.dataset.Dataset.to_table`. While each parquet file
contains only 10 rows, converting the dataset to a table will

> expose them as a single block of data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
expose them as a single Table.
```
When I see "block of data" I think buffer.

.. testcode::

    table = dataset.to_table()
    print(table)

    col1 = table["col1"]
    print(f"{type(col1).__name__} = {col1[0]} .. {col1[-1]}")

.. testoutput::

    pyarrow.Table
    col1: int64
    ChunkedArray = 0 .. 29

Notice that converting to a table will force all data to be loaded 

> in memory, which for big datasets is not what you usually want.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in memory.  For big datasets is usually not what you want.
```

For this reason, it might be better to rely on the 

> :meth:`pyarrow.dataset.Dataset.to_batches` method, which allows to
> iteratively load a chunk of data at the time returning a 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:meth:`pyarrow.dataset.Dataset.to_batches` method, which will
iteratively load the dataset one chunk of data at the time returning a 
```

        col1 = record_batch.column("col1")
        print(f"{col1._name} = {col1[0]} .. {col1[-1]}")

.. testoutput::

    col1 = 0 .. 9
    col1 = 10 .. 19
    col1 = 20 .. 29

Reading Partitioned Data from S3
================================

The :class:`pyarrow.dataset.Dataset` is also able to abstract
partitioned data coming from remote sources like S3 or HDFS.

.. testcode::

    from pyarrow import fs

    # List content of s3://ursa-labs-taxi-data/2011
    s3 = fs.SubTreeFileSystem("ursa-labs-taxi-data", fs.S3FileSystem(region="us-east-2"))
    for entry in s3.get_file_info(fs.FileSelector("2011", recursive=True)):
        if entry.type == fs.FileType.File:
            print(entry.path)

.. testoutput::

    2011/01/data.parquet
    2011/02/data.parquet
    2011/03/data.parquet
    2011/04/data.parquet
    2011/05/data.parquet
    2011/06/data.parquet
    2011/07/data.parquet
    2011/08/data.parquet
    2011/09/data.parquet
    2011/10/data.parquet
    2011/11/data.parquet
    2011/12/data.parquet

The data in the bucket can be loaded as a single big dataset partitioned
by ``month`` using

.. testcode::

    dataset = ds.dataset("s3://ursa-labs-taxi-data/2011", 

>                          partitioning=["month"])

Reviewer 2: It's not clear why you are specifying `partitioning=["month"]` here when you didn't do so above.  Also, it isn't needed (you'd get identical results I think without it).  Finally, it's not clear what this is doing.

    for f in dataset.files[:10]:
        print(f)
    print("...")

.. testoutput::

    ursa-labs-taxi-data/2011/01/data.parquet
    ursa-labs-taxi-data/2011/02/data.parquet
    ursa-labs-taxi-data/2011/03/data.parquet
    ursa-labs-taxi-data/2011/04/data.parquet
    ursa-labs-taxi-data/2011/05/data.parquet
    ursa-labs-taxi-data/2011/06/data.parquet
    ursa-labs-taxi-data/2011/07/data.parquet
    ursa-labs-taxi-data/2011/08/data.parquet
    ursa-labs-taxi-data/2011/09/data.parquet
    ursa-labs-taxi-data/2011/10/data.parquet
    ...

The dataset can then be used with :meth:`pyarrow.dataset.Dataset.to_table`
or :meth:`pyarrow.dataset.Dataset.to_batches` like you would for a local one.

.. note::

    It is possible to load partitioned data also in the ipc arrow
    format or in feather format.

> Write a Feather file

Reviewer 2: Nit: This is propagating the `feather` / `IPC` confusion but I don't think we can solve that here anyways.

====================

.. testsetup::

    import numpy as np
    import pyarrow as pa

    arr = pa.array(np.arange(100))

Given an array with all numbers from 0 to 100

.. testcode::

    print(f"{arr[0]} .. {arr[-1]}")

.. testoutput::

    0 .. 99

> To write it to a Feather file, as Feather is a columnar format,

Reviewer 2: Maybe just leave out `as Feather is a columnar format`?

Author: rephrased

================================

When reading a Parquet file with :func:`pyarrow.parquet.read_table` 
it is possible to restrict which Columns and Rows will be read
into memory by using the ``filters`` and ``columns`` arguments

.. testcode::

    import pyarrow.parquet as pq

    table = pq.read_table("example.parquet", 
                          columns=["col1"],
                          filters=[
                              ("col1", ">", 5),
                              ("col1", "<", 10),
                          ])

The resulting table will contain only the projected columns
and filtered rows. Refer to :func:`pyarrow.parquet.read_table`
documentation for details about the syntax for filters.

.. testcode::

    print(table)

    col1 = table["col1"]
    print(f"{type(col1).__name__} = {col1[0]} .. {col1[-1]}")

.. testoutput::

    pyarrow.Table
    col1: int64
    ChunkedArray = 6 .. 9
    

Saving Arrow Arrays to disk
===========================

Apart from using arrow to read and save common file formats like Parquet,
it is possible to dump data in the raw arrow format which allows 
direct memory mapping of data from disk. This format is called
the Arrow IPC format.

> Given an array with all numbers from 0 to 100

Reviewer 3: I'd change this to read: "Given the first 100 numbers starting from 0"

Author: rephrased
